To make it tangible, we are going to consider
the example of my mobile phone.
First thing I am going to do is to attach
a right handed coordinate frame to it and
I am going to have the z-axis out of the face
of the screen.
The y-axis is vertically upwards on the phone
and the x-axis is horizontal from left to
right.
I am going to call this frame B and that stands
for the body frame or the body-fixed frame.
This is a very common notation in aerospace
and also in robotics.
Now we are going to place one accelerometer
aligned with each of the axes that we have
attached to the phone.
So, one accelerometer would be in XB direction
and one in the YB direction and one in the
ZB direction.
Modern mobile phones, are packed full of inertial
sensors.
They contained three accelerometers, three
gyros and three magnetometers.
Like everything else that we've talked about
in this lecture series, we are going to attach
a coordinate frame to the phone.
You have to look reasonably deeply into the
documentation to find the coordinate frame
conventions for the phone, but for an iPhone
like this, the convention is the x-axis is
to the right and the y-axis is to the top
of the phone and the z-axis is out of the
screen.
So, I am going to fix one of my standard coordinate
frames to the phone, so we understand what's
what.
There are many apps that you can get for your
phone, that report the acceleration measurement
recorded by the sensors built into the phone
itself.
Unfortunately, many of these apps introduce
a negative sign.
That means that if the phone is sitting flat
on the table, it reports a value of minus
1G in the negative z or down with the direction
but as we discussed in the previous section,
acceleration of a device sitting flat on a
table should be 1G in the positive upward
x direction.
So, here we have the plumb bob, which is hanging
down under the force of gravity, so it is
aligned parallel to the gravitational acceleration
with the same gravitational acceleration is
parallel to the z-axis.
If I rotate the phone like this, so now, the
gravitational acceleration is parallel to
the y-axis and now I can rotate the phone,
so the gravitational acceleration is parallel
to the x-axis.
Let us consider now the problem of determining
the orientation of the phone with respect
to a world coordinate frame.
The world coordinate frame is shown here in
blue and its origin shows that the z-axis
is upwards and parallel to the gravity vector.
Frame B, the body frame is attached rigidly
to the phone.
Now I can write an expression for the orientation
of the phone with respect to the world coordinate
frame and I will do that in terms of yaw,
pitch and roll angles which are successive
rotations about the z-axis, the y-axis and
then the x-axis.
This is the gravitational acceleration in
the world frame because the world z-axis is
parallel to the gravitational acceleration
vector.
We note here that G is positive.
We are talking about acceleration in the world
frame is G in the upward direction.
It is very easy to rotate this gravitational
acceleration with respect to the world frame
into the body frame.
This is what the sensors in the phone actually
measure.
They are measuring gravity with respect to
frame B. It is really important to note that
this assumes that the phone is not accelerating.
The only acceleration on the body is that
due to gravity.
Now, I can expand out the right hand side
and I can replace the left hand side with
the gravity actually measured by the sensors
in the phone.
I have a very simple vector equation.
If I take the first row in this vector equation.
I can rearrange it to get a solution for the
pitch angle theta.
If I take the quotient of the last two rows
in the vector equation, I get this expression
for the roll angle of the phone.
Two very simple equations based on the measured
acceleration give me the roll and pitch angle
of the phone with respect to the world coordinate
frame.
Then you note in this equation that yaw angle
does not appear.
A simple way to think about why this is the
case, is that the gravity vector has got three
elements but its length is fixed therefore
we can define it by only two pieces of information.
The third element of the gravity vector is
redundant.
In this case, the two pieces of information
that we need are the roll angle and the pitch
angle.
We do not need the yaw angle.
To measure the yaw angle, we need to use a
different sensor and that sensor is actually
a compass and that is the topic of our next
section.
An important consideration when we use three
accelerometers, is that it measures only two
independent variables.
The length of the vector is fixed, so therefore,
we can describe that vector just in terms
of two angles.
We can see that very clearly when the phone
is configured like this.
Zero acceleration in the Z and the X directions.
The acceleration is all in the Y direction.
So the accelerometer measurements are exactly
the same with the phone orientated like this,
or like this or like this.
It makes absolutely no difference.
Accelerometers today have very low cost but
very, very high in performance.
Part of the reason for this is that they are
manufactured in enormous quantities.
They're use to trigger airbags in cars.
They're used in digital cameras to work out
whether the camera is in landscape or portrait
mode.
They're used in your phone for all sorts of
different applications and they're use the
stabilization of unmanned area of vehicles
from low cost toys like this to much more
sophisticated systems.